ANIMAL KINGDOM



When you look around, you will observe different animals with different
structures and forms. As over a million species of animals have been
described till now, the need for classification becomes all the more
important. The classification also helps in assigning a systematic position
to newly described species.
4.1 BASIS OF CLASSIFICATION
Inspite of differences in structure and form of different animals, there are
fundamental features common to various individuals in relation to the
arrangement of cells, body symmetry, nature of coelom, patterns of
digestive, circulatory or reproductive systems. These features are used
as the basis of animal classification and some of them are discussed here.
4.1.1 Levels of Organisation
Though all members of Animalia are multicellular, all of them do not
exhibit the same pattern of organisation of cells. For example, in sponges,
the cells are arranged as loose cell aggregates, i.e., they exhibit cellular
level of organisation. Some division of labour (activities) occur among
the cells. In coelenterates, the arrangement of cells is more complex. Here
the cells performing the same function are arranged into tissues, hence is
called tissue level of organisation. A still higher level of organisation, i.e.,
organ level is exhibited by members of Platyhelminthes and other higher
phyla where tissues are grouped together to form organs, each specialised
for a particular function. In animals like Annelids, Arthropods, Molluscs,
Echinoderms and Chordates, organs have
associated to form functional systems, each
system concerned with a specific physiological
function. This pattern is called organ system
level of organisation. Organ systems in different
groups of animals exhibit various patterns of
complexities. For example, the digestive system
in Platyhelminthes has only a single opening
to the outside of the body that serves as both
mouth and anus, and is hence called
incomplete. A complete digestive system has
two openings, mouth and anus. Similarly, the
circulatory system may be of two types:
(i) open type in which the blood is pumped
out of the heart and the cells and tissues are
directly bathed in it and
(ii) closed type in which the blood is circulated
through a series of vessels of varying diameters
(arteries, veins and capillaries).
4.1.2 Symmetry
Animals can be categorised on the basis of their
symmetry. Sponges are mostly asymmetrical,
i.e., any plane that passes through the centre
does not divide them into equal halves. When
any plane passing through the central axis of
the body divides the organism into two identical
halves, it is called radial symmetry.
Coelenterates, ctenophores and echinoderms
have this kind of body plan (Figure 4.1a).
Animals like annelids, arthropods, etc., where
the body can be divided into identical left and
right halves in only one plane, exhibit bilateral
symmetry (Figure 4.1b).
4.1.3 Diploblastic and Triploblastic
Organisation
Animals in which the cells are arranged in two
embryonic layers, an external ectoderm and
an internal endoderm, are called diploblastic
animals, e.g., coelenterates. An undifferentiated
layer, mesoglea, is present in between the
ectoderm and the endoderm (Figure 4.2a).
Those animals in which the developing embryo has a third germinal layer,
mesoderm, in between the ectoderm and endoderm, are called
triploblastic animals (platyhelminthes to chordates, Figure 4.2b).
4.1.4 Coelom
Presence or absence of a cavity between the body
wall and the gut wall is very important in
classification. The body cavity, which is lined
by mesoderm is called coelom. Animals
possessing coelom are called coelomates, e.g.,
annelids, molluscs, arthropods, echinoderms,
hemichordates and chordates (Figure 4.3a). In
some animals, the body cavity is not lined by
mesoderm, instead, the mesoderm is present as
scattered pouches in between the ectoderm and
endoderm. Such a body cavity is called
pseudocoelom and the animals possessing them
are called pseudocoelomates, e.g.,
aschelminthes (Figure 4.3b). The animals in
which the body cavity is absent are called
acoelomates, e.g., platyhelminthes (Figure 4.3c).
4.1.5 Segmentation
In some animals, the body is externally and internally divided into
segments with a serial repetition of at least some organs. For example, in
earthworm, the body shows this pattern called metameric segmentation
and the phenomenon is known as metamerism.
4.1.6 Notochord
Notochord is a mesodermally derived rod-like structure formed on the
dorsal side during embryonic development in some animals. Animals with
notochord are called chordates and those animals which do not form this
structure are called non-chordates, e.g., porifera to echinoderms.
4.2 CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMALS
The broad classification of Animalia based on common fundamental
features as mentioned in the preceding sections is given in Figure 4.4.
4.2.1 Phylum – Porifera
Members of this phylum are commonly known
as sponges. They are generally marine and mostly
asymmetrical animals (Figure 4.5). These are
primitive multicellular animals and have cellular
level of organisation. Sponges have a water
transport or canal system. Water enters through
minute pores (ostia) in the body wall into a central
cavity, spongocoel, from where it goes out
through the osculum. This pathway of water
transport is helpful in food gathering, respiratory
exchange and removal of waste. Choanocytes
or collar cells line the spongocoel and the canals.
Digestion is intracellular. The body is supported
by a skeleton made up of spicules or spongin
fibres. Sexes are not separate (hermaphrodite),
i.e., eggs and sperms are produced by the same
individual. Sponges reproduce asexually by
fragmentation and sexually by formation of
gametes. Fertilisation is internal and development
is indirect having a larval stage which is
morphologically distinct from the adult.
4.2.2 Phylum – Coelenterata (Cnidaria)
They are aquatic, mostly marine, sessile or free-swimming, radially
symmetrical animals (Figure 4.6). The name cnidaria is derived from the
cnidoblasts or cnidocytes (which contain the stinging capsules or
nematocysts) present on the tentacles and the body. Cnidoblasts are used
for anchorage, defense and for the capture of prey (Figure 4.7). Cnidarians
exhibit tissue level of organisation and are diploblastic. They have a central
gastro-vascular cavity with a single opening, mouth on hypostome.
Digestion is extracellular and intracellular. Some of the cnidarians, e.g.,
corals have a skeleton composed of calcium carbonate. Cnidarians exhibit
two basic body forms called polyp and medusa (Figure 4.6). The former
is a sessile and cylindrical form like Hydra, Adamsia, etc. whereas, the
latter is umbrella-shaped and free-swimming like Aurelia or jelly fish.
Those cnidarians which exist in both forms exhibit alternation of
generation (Metagenesis), i.e., polyps produce medusae asexually and
medusae form the polyps sexually (e.g., Obelia).
Examples: Physalia (Portuguese man-of-war), Adamsia (Sea anemone),
Pennatula (Sea-pen), Gorgonia (Sea-fan) and Meandrina (Brain coral).
4.2.3 Phylum – Ctenophora
Ctenophores, commonly known as sea walnuts or comb jellies
are exclusively marine, radially symmetrical, diploblastic
organisms with tissue level of organisation. The body bears
eight external rows of ciliated comb plates, which help in
locomotion (Figure 4.8). Digestion is both extracellular and
intracellular. Bioluminescence (the property of a living
organism to emit light) is well-marked in ctenophores. Sexes
are not separate. Reproduction takes place only by sexual
means. Fertilisation is external with indirect development.
Examples: Pleurobrachia and Ctenoplana.
4.2.4 Phylum – Platyhelminthes
They have dorso-ventrally flattened body, hence are called
flatworms (Figure 4.9). These are mostly endoparasites found
in animals including human beings. Flatworms are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic and acoelomate animals with organ
level of organisation. Hooks and suckers are present in the
parasitic forms. Some of them absorb nutrients from the host
directly through their body surface. Specialised cells called
flame cells help in osmoregulation and excretion. Sexes are not
separate. Fertilisation is internal and development is through
many larval stages. Some members like Planaria possess high
regeneration capacity.
Examples: Taenia (Tapeworm), Fasciola (Liver fluke)
4.2.5 Phylum – Aschelminthes
The body of the aschelminthes is circular in
cross-section, hence, the name roundworms
(Figure 4.10). They may be freeliving, aquatic
and terrestrial or parasitic in plants and animals.
Roundworms have organ-system level of body
organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical,
triploblastic and pseudocoelomate animals.
Alimentary canal is complete with a welldeveloped muscular pharynx. An excretory
tube removes body wastes from the body cavity
through the excretory pore. Sexes are separate
(dioecious), i.e., males and females are distinct.
Often females are longer than males. Fertilisation
is internal and development may be direct (the
young ones resemble the adult) or indirect.
Examples : Ascaris (Roundworm), Wuchereria
(Filaria worm), Ancylostoma (Hookworm).
4.2.6 Phylum – Annelida
They may be aquatic (marine and fresh water) or
terrestrial; free-living, and sometimes parasitic.
They exhibit organ-system level of body
organisation and bilateral symmetry. They are
triploblastic, metamerically segmented and
coelomate animals. Their body surface is
distinctly marked out into segments or
metameres and, hence, the phylum name
Annelida (Latin, annulus : little ring) (Figure 4.11).
They possess longitudinal and circular muscles
which help in locomotion. Aquatic annelids like
Nereis possess lateral appendages, parapodia,
which help in swimming. A closed circulatory
system is present. Nephridia (sing. nephridium)
help in osmoregulation and excretion. Neural
system consists of paired ganglia (sing. ganglion)
connected by lateral nerves to a double ventral
nerve cord. Nereis, an aquatic form, is dioecious,
but earthworms and leeches are monoecious.
Reproduction is sexual.
Examples : Nereis, Pheretima (Earthworm) and
Hirudinaria (Blood sucking leech).
4.2.5 Phylum – Aschelminthes
The body of the aschelminthes is circular in
cross-section, hence, the name roundworms
(Figure 4.10). They may be freeliving, aquatic
and terrestrial or parasitic in plants and animals.
Roundworms have organ-system level of body
organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical,
triploblastic and pseudocoelomate animals.
Alimentary canal is complete with a welldeveloped muscular pharynx. An excretory
tube removes body wastes from the body cavity
through the excretory pore. Sexes are separate
(dioecious), i.e., males and females are distinct.
Often females are longer than males. Fertilisation
is internal and development may be direct (the
young ones resemble the adult) or indirect.
Examples : Ascaris (Roundworm), Wuchereria
(Filaria worm), Ancylostoma (Hookworm).
4.2.6 Phylum – Annelida
They may be aquatic (marine and fresh water) or
terrestrial; free-living, and sometimes parasitic.
They exhibit organ-system level of body
organisation and bilateral symmetry. They are
triploblastic, metamerically segmented and
coelomate animals. Their body surface is
distinctly marked out into segments or
metameres and, hence, the phylum name
Annelida (Latin, annulus : little ring) (Figure 4.11).
They possess longitudinal and circular muscles
which help in locomotion. Aquatic annelids like
Nereis possess lateral appendages, parapodia,
which help in swimming. A closed circulatory
system is present. Nephridia (sing. nephridium)
help in osmoregulation and excretion. Neural
system consists of paired ganglia (sing. ganglion)
connected by lateral nerves to a double ventral
nerve cord. Nereis, an aquatic form, is dioecious,
but earthworms and leeches are monoecious.
Reproduction is sexual.
Examples : Nereis, Pheretima (Earthworm) and
Hirudinaria (Blood sucking leech).
4.2.7 Phylum – Arthropoda
This is the largest phylum of Animalia which
includes insects. Over two-thirds of all named
species on earth are arthropods (Figure 4.12).
They have organ-system level of organisation.
They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic,
segmented and coelomate animals. The body
of arthropods is covered by chitinous
exoskeleton. The body consists of head, thorax
and abdomen. They have jointed appendages
(arthros-joint, poda-appendages). Respiratory
organs are gills, book gills, book lungs or
tracheal system. Circulatory system is of open
type. Sensory organs like antennae, eyes
(compound and simple), statocysts or
balancing organs are present. Excretion takes
place through malpighian tubules. They are
mostly dioecious. Fertilisation is usually
internal. They are mostly oviparous.
Development may be direct or indirect.
Examples: Economically important insects –
Apis (Honey bee), Bombyx (Silkworm), Laccifer
(Lac insect)
Vectors – Anopheles, Culex and Aedes
(Mosquitoes)
Gregarious pest – Locusta (Locust)
Living fossil – Limulus (King crab).
4.2.8 Phylum – Mollusca
This is the second largest animal phylum
(Figure 4.13). Molluscs are terrestrial or aquatic
(marine or fresh water) having an organ-system
level of organisation. They are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
animals. Body is covered by a calcareous shell
and is unsegmented with a distinct head,
muscular foot and visceral hump. A soft and
spongy layer of skin forms a mantle over the
visceral hump. The space between the hump
and the mantle is called the mantle cavity in
which feather like gills are present. They have
respiratory and excretory functions. The
anterior head region has sensory tentacles. The
mouth contains a file-like rasping organ for
feeding, called radula.
They are usually dioecious and oviparous with indirect
development.
Examples: Pila (Apple snail), Pinctada (Pearl oyster), Sepia
(Cuttlefish), Loligo (Squid), Octopus (Devil fish), Aplysia (Seahare), Dentalium (Tusk shell) and Chaetopleura (Chiton).
4.2.9 Phylum – Echinodermata
These animals have an endoskeleton of calcareous ossicles
and, hence, the name Echinodermata (Spiny bodied, Figure
4.14). All are marine with organ-system level of organisation.
The adult echinoderms are radially symmetrical but larvae
are bilaterally symmetrical. They are triploblastic and
coelomate animals. Digestive system is complete with mouth
on the lower (ventral) side and anus on the upper (dorsal)
side. The most distinctive feature of echinoderms is the
presence of water vascular system which helps in
locomotion, capture and transport of food and respiration.
An excretory system is absent. Sexes are separate.
Reproduction is sexual. Fertilisation is usually external.
Development is indirect with free-swimming larva.
Examples: Asterias (Star fish), Echinus (Sea urchin), Antedon
(Sea lily), Cucumaria (Sea cucumber) and Ophiura (Brittle star).
4.2.10 Phylum – Hemichordata
Hemichordata was earlier considered as a sub-phylum under
phylum Chordata. But now it is placed as a separate phylum
under non-chordata. Hemichordates have a rudimentary
structure in the collar region called stomochord, a structure
similar to notochord.
This phylum consists of a small group of worm-like
marine animals with organ-system level of organisation. They
are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
animals. The body is cylindrical and is composed of an
anterior proboscis, a collar and a long trunk (Figure 4.15).
Circulatory system is of open type. Respiration takes place
through gills. Excretory organ is proboscis gland. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is external. Development is indirect.
Examples: Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus.
4.2.11 Phylum – Chordata
Animals belonging to phylum Chordata are fundamentally
characterised by the presence of a notochord, a dorsal
hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal
gill slits (Figure 4.16). These are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic, coelomate with
organ-system level of organisation. They
possess a post anal tail and a closed circulatory
system.
Table 4.1 presents a comparison of salient
features of chordates and non-chordates
hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal
gill slits (Figure 4.16). These are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic, coelomate with
organ-system level of organisation. They
possess a post anal tail and a closed circulatory
system.
Table 4.1 presents a comparison of salient
features of chordates and non-chordates
All living members of the class Cyclostomata are
ectoparasites on some fishes. They have an
elongated body bearing 6-15 pairs of gill slits
for respiration. Cyclostomes have a sucking and
circular mouth without jaws (Fig. 4.18). Their
body is devoid of scales and paired fins.
Cranium and vertebral column are
cartilaginous. Circulation is of closed type.
Cyclostomes are marine but migrate for
spawning to fresh water. After spawning, within
a few days, they die. Their larvae, after
metamorphosis, return to the ocean.
Examples: Petromyzon (Lamprey) and Myxine
(Hagfish).
4.2.11.2 Class – Chondrichthyes
They are marine animals with streamlined body
and have cartilaginous endoskeleton
(Figure 4.19). Mouth is located ventrally.
Notochord is persistent throughout life. Gill
slits are separate and without operculum (gill
cover). The skin is tough, containing minute
placoid scales. Teeth are modified placoid
scales which are backwardly directed. Their
jaws are very powerful. These animals are
predaceous. Due to the absence of air bladder,
they have to swim constantly to avoid sinking
Heart is two-chambered (one auricle and one ventricle).
Some of them have electric organs (e.g., Torpedo) and
some possess poison sting (e.g., Trygon). They are
cold-blooded (poikilothermous) animals, i.e., they lack
the capacity to regulate their body temperature. Sexes
are separate. In males pelvic fins bear claspers. They
have internal fertilisation and many of them are
viviparous.
Examples: Scoliodon (Dog fish), Pristis (Saw fish),
Carcharodon (Great white shark), Trygon (Sting ray).
4.2.11.3 Class – Osteichthyes
It includes both marine and fresh water fishes with bony
endoskeleton. Their body is streamlined. Mouth is
mostly terminal (Figure 4.20). They have four pairs of
gills which are covered by an operculum on each side.
Skin is covered with cycloid/ctenoid scales. Air bladder
is present which regulates buoyancy. Heart is twochambered (one auricle and one ventricle). They are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is usually external. They are mostly oviparous and
development is direct.
Examples: Marine – Exocoetus (Flying fish),
Hippocampus (Sea horse); Freshwater – Labeo (Rohu),
Catla (Katla), Clarias (Magur); Aquarium – Betta
(Fighting fish), Pterophyllum (Angel fish).
4.2.11.4 Class – Amphibia
As the name indicates (Gr., Amphi : dual, bios, life),
amphibians can live in aquatic as well as terrestrial
habitats (Figure 4.21). Most of them have two pairs of
limbs. Body is divisible into head and trunk. Tail may
be present in some. The amphibian skin is moist
(without scales). The eyes have eyelids. A tympanum
represents the ear. Alimentary canal, urinary and
reproductive tracts open into a common chamber called
cloaca which opens to the exterior. Respiration is by
gills, lungs and through skin. The heart is threechambered (two auricles and one ventricle). These are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is external. They are oviparous and development
is indirect.
Examples: Bufo (Toad), Rana (Frog), Hyla (Tree frog),
Salamandra (Salamander), Ichthyophis (Limbless
amphibia)
The class name refers to their creeping or crawling mode of locomotion
(Latin, repere or reptum, to creep or crawl). They are mostly terrestrial
animals and their body is covered by dry and cornified skin, epidermal
scales or scutes (Fig. 4.22). They do not have external ear openings.
Tympanum represents ear. Limbs, when present, are two pairs. Heart is
usually three-chambered, but four-chambered in crocodiles. Reptiles are
poikilotherms. Snakes and lizards shed their scales as skin cast. Sexes
are separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development
is direct.
Examples: Chelone (Turtle), Testudo (Tortoise), Chameleon (Tree lizard),
Calotes (Garden lizard), Crocodilus (Crocodile), Alligator (Alligator).
Hemidactylus (Wall lizard), Poisonous snakes – Naja (Cobra), Bangarus
(Krait), Vipera (Viper).
4.2.11.6 Class – Aves
The characteristic features of Aves (birds) are the presence of feathers
and most of them can fly except flightless birds (e.g., Ostrich). They possess
beak (Figure 4.23). The forelimbs are modified into wings. The hind limbs
generally have scales and are modified for walking, swimming or clasping
the tree branches. Skin is dry without glands except the oil gland at the
base of the tail. Endoskeleton is fully ossified (bony) and the long bones
are hollow with air cavities (pneumatic). The digestive tract of birds has
additional chambers, the crop and gizzard. Heart is completely fourchambered. They are warm-blooded (homoiothermous) animals, i.e.,
they are able to maintain a constant body temperature. Respiration is by
lungs. Air sacs connected to lungs supplement respiration. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development is
direct.
Examples : Corvus (Crow), Columba (Pigeon), Psittacula (Parrot), Struthio
(Ostrich), Pavo (Peacock), Aptenodytes (Penguin), Neophron (Vulture).
4.2.11.7 Class – Mammalia
They are found in a variety of habitats – polar ice caps, deserts, mountains,
forests, grasslands and dark caves. Some of them have adapted to fly or
live in water. The most unique mammalian characteristic is the presence
of milk producing glands (mammary glands) by which the young ones
are nourished. They have two pairs of limbs, adapted for walking, running,
climbing, burrowing, swimming or flying (Figure 4.24). The skin of
mammals is unique in possessing hair. External ears or pinnae are
present. Different types of teeth are present in the jaw. Heart is fourchambered. They are homoiothermous. Respiration is by lungs. Sexes
are separate and fertilisation is internal. They are viviparous with few
exceptions and development is direct.
Examples: Oviparous-Ornithorhynchus (Platypus); Viviparous -
Macropus (Kangaroo), Pteropus (Flying fox), Camelus (Camel), Macaca
(Monkey), Rattus (Rat), Canis (Dog), Felis (Cat), Elephas (Elephant),
Equus (Horse), Delphinus (Common dolphin), Balaenoptera (Blue whale),
Panthera tigris (Tiger), Panthera leo (Lion).
The salient distinguishing features of all phyla under animal kingdom
is comprehensively given in the Table 4.2.
