MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS




The wide range in the structure of higher plants will never fail to fascinate
us. Even though the angiosperms show such a large diversity in external
structure or morphology, they are all characterised by presence of roots,
stems, leaves, flowers and fruits.
In chapters 2 and 3, we talked about classification of plants based
on morphological and other characteristics. For any successful attempt
at classification and at understanding any higher plant (or for that
matter any living organism) we need to know standard technical terms
and standard definitions. We also need to know about the possible
variations in different parts, found as adaptations of the plants to their
environment, e.g., adaptions to various habitats, for protection,
climbing, storage, etc.
If you pull out any weed you will see that all of them have roots, stems
and leaves. They may be bearing flowers and fruits. The underground
part of the flowering plant is the root system while the portion above the
ground forms the shoot system (Figure 5.1).
5.1 THE ROOT
In majority of the dicotyledonous plants, the direct elongation of the radicle
leads to the formation of primary root which grows inside the soil.
It bears lateral roots of several orders that are referred to as secondary,
tertiary, etc. roots. The primary roots and its branches constitute the
tap root system, as seen in the mustard
plant (Figure 5.2a). In monocotyledonous
plants, the primary root is short lived and
is replaced by a large number of roots.
These roots originate from the base of the
stem and constitute the fibrous root
system, as seen in the wheat plant (Figure
5.2b). In some plants, like grass,
Monstera and the banyan tree, roots arise
from parts of the plant other than the
radicle and are called adventitious roots
(Figure 5.2c). The main functions of the
root system are absorption of water and
minerals from the soil, providing a proper
anchorage to the plant parts, storing
reserve food material and synthesis of
plant growth regulators.
5.1.1 Regions of the Root
The root is covered at the apex by a thimble-like
structure called the root cap (Figure 5.3). It
protects the tender apex of the root as it makes
its way through the soil. A few millimetres above
the root cap is the region of meristematic
activity. The cells of this region are very small,
thin-walled and with dense protoplasm. They
divide repeatedly. The cells proximal to this
region undergo rapid elongation and
enlargement and are responsible for the growth
of the root in length. This region is called the
region of elongation. The cells of the elongation
zone gradually differentiate and mature. Hence,
this zone, proximal to region of elongation, is
called the region of maturation. From this
region some of the epidermal cells form very fine
and delicate, thread-like structures called root
hairs. These root hairs absorb water and
minerals from the soil.
5.1.2 Modifications of Root
Roots in some plants change their shape and
structure and become modified to perform
functions other than absorption and
conduction of water and minerals. They are
modified for support, storage of food and
respiration (Figure 5.4 and 5.5). Tap roots of
carrot, turnip and adventitious roots of sweet
potato, get swollen and store food. Can you give
some more such examples? Have you ever
wondered what those hanging structures that
support a banyan tree are? These are called
prop roots. Similarly, the stems of maize and
sugarcane have supporting roots coming out
of the lower nodes of the stem. These are called
stilt roots. In some plants such as Rhizophora
growing in swampy areas, many roots come out
of the ground and grow vertically upwards.
Such roots, called pneumatophores, help to
get oxygen for respiration (Figure 5.5b).
5.2 THE STEM
What are the features that distinguish a stem from a root? The stem is the
ascending part of the axis bearing branches, leaves, flowers and fruits. It
develops from the plumule of the embryo of a germinating seed. The stem
bears nodes and internodes. The region of the stem where leaves are
born are called nodes while internodes are the portions between two nodes.
The stem bears buds, which may be terminal or axillary. Stem is generally
green when young and later often become woody and dark brown.
The main function of the stem is spreading out branches bearing
leaves, flowers and fruits. It conducts water, minerals and photosynthates.
Some stems perform the function of storage of food, support, protection
and of vegetative propagation.
5.2.1 Modifications of Stem
The stem may not always be typically like what they are expected to be.
They are modified to perform different functions (Figure 5.6). Underground
stems of potato, ginger, turmeric, zaminkand, Colocasia are modified to
store food in them. They also act as organs of perennation to tide over
conditions unfavourable for growth. Stem tendrils which develop from
axillary buds, are slender and spirally coiled and help plants to climb
such as in gourds (cucumber, pumpkins, watermelon) and grapevines.
Axillary buds of stems may also get modified into woody, straight and
pointed thorns. Thorns are found in many plants such as Citrus,
Bougainvillea. They protect plants from browsing animals. Some plants
of arid regions modify their stems into flattened (Opuntia), or fleshy
cylindrical (Euphorbia) structures. They contain chlorophyll and carry
out photosynthesis. Underground stems of some plants such as grass
and strawberry, etc., spread to new niches and when older parts die new
plants are formed. In plants like mint and jasmine a slender lateral branch
arises from the base of the main axis and after growing aerially for some
time arch downwards to touch the ground. A lateral branch with short
internodes and each node bearing a rosette of leaves and a tuft of roots is
found in aquatic plants like Pistia and Eichhornia. In banana, pineapple
and Chrysanthemum, the lateral branches originate from the basal and
underground portion of the main stem, grow horizontally beneath the
soil and then come out obliquely upward giving rise to leafy shoots.
5.3 THE LEAF
The leaf is a lateral, generally flattened structure borne on the stem. It
develops at the node and bears a bud in its axil. The axillary bud later
develops into a branch. Leaves originate from shoot apical meristems and
are arranged in an acropetal order. They are the most important vegetative
organs for photosynthesis.
A typical leaf consists of three main parts: leaf base, petiole and lamina
(Figure 5.7 a). The leaf is attached to the stem by the leaf base and may
out photosynthesis. Underground stems of some plants such as grass
and strawberry, etc., spread to new niches and when older parts die new
plants are formed. In plants like mint and jasmine a slender lateral branch
arises from the base of the main axis and after growing aerially for some
time arch downwards to touch the ground. A lateral branch with short
internodes and each node bearing a rosette of leaves and a tuft of roots is
found in aquatic plants like Pistia and Eichhornia. In banana, pineapple
and Chrysanthemum, the lateral branches originate from the basal and
underground portion of the main stem, grow horizontally beneath the
soil and then come out obliquely upward giving rise to leafy shoots.
5.3 THE LEAF
The leaf is a lateral, generally flattened structure borne on the stem. It
develops at the node and bears a bud in its axil. The axillary bud later
develops into a branch. Leaves originate from shoot apical meristems and
are arranged in an acropetal order. They are the most important vegetative
organs for photosynthesis.
A typical leaf consists of three main parts: leaf base, petiole and lamina
(Figure 5.7 a). The leaf is attached to the stem by the leaf base and may
out photosynthesis. Underground stems of some plants such as grass
and strawberry, etc., spread to new niches and when older parts die new
plants are formed. In plants like mint and jasmine a slender lateral branch
arises from the base of the main axis and after growing aerially for some
time arch downwards to touch the ground. A lateral branch with short
internodes and each node bearing a rosette of leaves and a tuft of roots is
found in aquatic plants like Pistia and Eichhornia. In banana, pineapple
and Chrysanthemum, the lateral branches originate from the basal and
underground portion of the main stem, grow horizontally beneath the
soil and then come out obliquely upward giving rise to leafy shoots.
5.3 THE LEAF
The leaf is a lateral, generally flattened structure borne on the stem. It
develops at the node and bears a bud in its axil. The axillary bud later
develops into a branch. Leaves originate from shoot apical meristems and
are arranged in an acropetal order. They are the most important vegetative
organs for photosynthesis.
A typical leaf consists of three main parts: leaf base, petiole and lamina
(Figure 5.7 a). The leaf is attached to the stem by the leaf base and may
floral axis is termed as inflorescence. Depending
on whether the apex gets developed into a flower or
continues to grow, two major types of inflorescences
are defined – racemose and cymose. In racemose
type of inflorescences the main axis continues to
grow, the flowers are borne laterally in an acropetal
succession (Figure 5.11).
In cymose type of inflorescence the main axis
terminates in a flower, hence is limited in growth.The
flowers are borne in a basipetal order (Figure 5.12).
5.5 THE FLOWER
The flower is the reproductive unit in the
angiosperms. It is meant for sexual reproduction.
A typical flower has four different kinds of whorls
arranged successively on the swollen end of the
stalk or pedicel, called thalamus or receptacle.
These are calyx, corolla, androecium and
gynoecium. Calyx and corolla are accessory organs,
while androecium and gynoecium are reproductive
organs. In some flowers like lily, the calyx and
corolla are not distinct and are termed as perianth.
When a flower has both androecium and
gynoecium, it is bisexual. A flower having either
only stamens or only carpels is unisexual.
In symmetry, the flower may be
actinomorphic (radial symmetry) or
zygomorphic (bilateral symmetry). When a flower
can be divided into two equal radial halves in any
radial plane passing through the centre, it is said
to be actinomorphic, e.g., mustard, datura, chilli.
When it can be divided into two similar halves only
in one particular vertical plane, it is zygomorphic,
e.g., pea, gulmohur, bean, Cassia. A flower is
asymmetric (irregular) if it cannot be divided into
two similar halves by any vertical plane passing
through the centre, as in canna.
A flower may be trimerous, tetramerous or
pentamerous when the floral appendages are in
multiple of 3, 4 or 5, respectively. Flowers
with bracts-reduced leaf found at the base of the
pedicel - are called bracteate and those without
bracts, ebracteate.
Based on the position of calyx, corolla and androecium in respect of
the ovary on thalamus, the flowers are described as hypogynous,
perigynous and epigynous (Figure 5.13). In the hypogynous flower the
gynoecium occupies the highest position while the other parts are situated
below it. The ovary in such flowers is said to be superior, e.g., mustard,
china rose and brinjal. If gynoecium is situated in the centre and other
parts of the flower are located on the rim of the thalamus almost at the
same level, it is called perigynous. The ovary here is said to be half
inferior, e.g., plum, rose, peach. In epigynous flowers, the margin of
thalamus grows upward enclosing the ovary completely and getting fused
with it, the other parts of flower arise above the ovary. Hence, the ovary is
said to be inferior as in flowers of guava and cucumber, and the ray
florets of sunflower.
5.5.1 Parts of a Flower
Each flower normally has four floral whorls, viz., calyx, corolla,
androecium and gynoecium (Figure 5.14).
5.5.1.1 Calyx
The calyx is the outermost whorl of the flower and the members are called
sepals. Generally, sepals are green, leaf like and protect the flower in the
bud stage. The calyx may be gamosepalous (sepals united) or
polysepalous (sepals free).
5.5.1.2 Corolla
Corolla is composed of petals. Petals are usually brightly coloured to
attract insects for pollination. Like calyx, corolla may also be
gamopetalous (petals united) or polypetalous (petals free). The shape
and colour of corolla vary greatly in plants. Corolla may be tubular, bellshaped, funnel-shaped or wheel-shaped.
Aestivation: The mode of arrangement of sepals or petals in floral bud
with respect to the other members of the same whorl is known as
aestivation. The main types of aestivation are valvate, twisted, imbricate
and vexillary (Figure 5.15). When sepals or petals in a whorl just touch
one another at the margin, without overlapping, as in Calotropis, it is
said to be valvate. If one margin of the appendage overlaps that of the
next one and so on as in china rose, lady’s finger and cotton, it is called
twisted. If the margins of sepals or petals overlap one another but not in
any particular direction as in Cassia and gulmohur, the aestivation is
called imbricate. In pea and bean flowers, there are five petals, the largest
(standard) overlaps the two lateral petals (wings) which in turn overlap
the two smallest anterior petals (keel); this type of aestivation is known
as vexillary or papilionaceous.
5.5.1.3 Androecium
Androecium is composed of stamens. Each stamen which
represents the male reproductive organ consists of a stalk or a
filament and an anther. Each anther is usually bilobed and each
lobe has two chambers, the pollen-sacs. The pollen grains are
produced in pollen-sacs. A sterile stamen is called staminode.
Stamens of flower may be united with other members such as
petals or among themselves. When stamens are attached to the
petals, they are epipetalous as in brinjal, or epiphyllous when
attached to the perianth as in the flowers of lily. The stamens in a
flower may either remain free (polyandrous) or may be united in
varying degrees. The stamens may be united into one bunch or
one bundle (monoadelphous) as in china rose, or two bundles
(diadelphous) as in pea, or into more than two bundles
(polyadelphous) as in citrus. There may be a variation in the length
of filaments within a flower, as in Salvia and mustard.
5.5.1.4 Gynoecium
Gynoecium is the female reproductive part of the flower and is made
up of one or more carpels. A carpel consists of three parts namely
stigma, style and ovary. Ovary is the enlarged basal part, on which
lies the elongated tube, the style. The style connects the ovary to the
stigma. The stigma is usually at the tip of the style and is the
receptive surface for pollen grains. Each ovary bears one or more
ovules attached to a flattened, cushion-like placenta. When more
than one carpel is present, they may be free (as in lotus and rose)
and are called apocarpous. They are termed syncarpous when
carpels are fused, as in mustard and tomato. After fertilisation, the
ovules develop into seeds and the ovary matures into a fruit.
Placentation: The arrangement of ovules within the ovary is known
as placentation. The placentation are of different types namely,
marginal, axile, parietal, basal, central and free central (Figure 5.16).
In marginal placentation the placenta forms a ridge along the
ventral suture of the ovary and the ovules are borne on this ridge
forming two rows, as in pea. When the placenta is axial and the
ovules are attached to it in a multilocular ovary, the placentaion is
said to be axile, as in china rose, tomato and lemon. In parietal
placentation, the ovules develop on the inner wall of the ovary or
on peripheral part. Ovary is one-chambered but it becomes twochambered due to the formation of the false septum, e.g., mustard
and Argemone. When the ovules are borne on central axis and
septa are absent, as in Dianthus and Primrose the placentation is
called free central. In basal placentation, the placenta develops at the
base of ovary and a single ovule is attached to it, as in sunflower, marigold.
5.6 THE FRUIT
The fruit is a characteristic feature of the flowering plants. It is a mature
or ripened ovary, developed after fertilisation. If a fruit is formed without
fertilisation of the ovary, it is called a parthenocarpic fruit.
Generally, the fruit consists of a wall or pericarp and seeds. The
pericarp may be dry or fleshy. When pericarp is thick and fleshy, it is
differentiated into the outer epicarp, the middle mesocarp and the inner
endocarp.
In mango and coconut, the fruit is known as a drupe (Figure 5.17).
They develop from monocarpellary superior ovaries and are one seeded.
In mango the pericarp is well differentiated into an outer thin epicarp, a
middle fleshy edible mesocarp and an inner stony hard endocarp. In
coconut which is also a drupe, the mesocarp is fibrous.
5.7 THE SEED
The ovules after fertilisation, develop into seeds. A seed is made up of a
seed coat and an embryo. The embryo is made up of a radicle, an embryonal
axis and one (as in wheat, maize) or two cotyledons (as in gram and pea).
5.7.1 Structure of a Dicotyledonous Seed
The outermost covering of a seed is the seed coat. The seed coat has two
layers, the outer testa and the inner tegmen. The hilum is a scar on the
seed coat through which the developing seeds were attached to the fruit.
Above the hilum is a small pore called the micropyle. Within the seed
coat is the embryo, consisting of an
embryonal axis and two cotyledons. The
cotyledons are often fleshy and full of reserve
food materials. At the two ends of the
embryonal axis are present the radicle and
the plumule (Figure 5.18). In some seeds
such as castor the endosperm formed as a
result of double fertilisation, is a food storing
tissue and called endospermic seeds. In
plants such as bean, gram and pea, the
endosperm is not present in mature seeds
and such seeds are called nonendospermous.
5.7.2 Structure of Monocotyledonous Seed
Generally, monocotyledonous seeds are endospermic but some as in
orchids are non-endospermic. In the seeds of cereals such as maize the
seed coat is membranous and generally fused with the fruit wall. The
endosperm is bulky and stores food. The outer covering of endosperm
separates the embryo by a proteinous layer called aleurone layer. The
embryo is small and situated in a groove at one end of the endosperm. It
consists of one large and shield shaped cotyledon known as scutellum
and a short axis with a plumule and a radicle. The plumule and radicle
are enclosed in sheaths which are called coleoptile and coleorhiza
respectively (Figure 5.19).
5.8 SEMI-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION OF A TYPICAL
FLOWERING PLANT
Various morphological features are used to describe a
flowering plant. The description has to be brief, in a simple
and scientific language and presented in a proper
sequence. The plant is described beginning with its habit,
vegetative characters – roots, stem and leaves and then
floral characters inflorescence and flower parts. After
describing various parts of plant, a floral diagram and a
floral formula are presented. The floral formula is
represented by some symbols. In the floral formula, Br
stands for bracteate K stands for calyx , C for corolla, P for
perianth, A for androecium and G for Gynoecium, G for
superior ovary and G for inferior ovary, for male, for
female, for bisexual plants, ⊕ for actinomorphic and
for zygomorphic nature of flower. Fusion is indicated by
enclosing the figure within bracket and adhesion by a line
drawn above the symbols of the floral parts. A floral
diagram provides information about the number of parts
of a flower, their arrangement and the relation they have
with one another (Figure 5.20). The position of the mother
axis with respect to the flower is represented by a dot on
the top of the floral diagram. Calyx, corolla, androecium
and gynoecium are drawn in successive whorls, calyx being
the outermost and the gynoecium being in the centre.
Floral formula also shows cohesion and adhesion within
parts of whorls and between whorls. The floral diagram
and floral formula in Figure 5.20 represents the mustard
plant (Family: Brassicaceae).
5.9 DESCRIPTION OF SOME IMPORTANT FAMILIES
5.9.1 Fabaceae
This family was earlier called Papilionoideae, a subfamily
of family Leguminosae. It is distributed all over the world
(Figure 5.21).
Vegetative Characters
Trees, shrubs, herbs; root with root nodules
Stem: erect or climber
Leaves: alternate, pinnately compound or simple; leaf base,
pulvinate; stipulate; venation reticulate.
Floral characters
Inflorescence: racemose
Flower: bisexual, zygomorphic
Calyx: sepals five, gamosepalous; valvate/imbricate aestivation
Corolla: petals five, polypetalous, papilionaceous, consisting of a posterior
standard, two lateral wings, two anterior ones forming a keel (enclosing
stamens and pistil), vexillary aestivation
Androecium: ten, diadelphous, anther dithecous
Gynoecium: ovary superior, mono carpellary, unilocular with many
ovules, style single
Fruit: legume; seed: one to many, non-endospermic
Floral Formula: % K(5) C1+2+(2) A(9)+1 G1
Economic importance
Many plants belonging to the family are sources of pulses (gram, arhar,
sem, moong, soyabean; edible oil (soyabean, groundnut); dye (Indigofera);
fibres (sunhemp); fodder (Sesbania, Trifolium), ornamentals (lupin, sweet
pea); medicine (muliathi).
5.9.2 Solanaceae
It is a large family, commonly called as the ‘potato family’. It is widely
distributed in tropics, subtropics and even temperate zones (Figure 5.22).
Vegetative Characters
Plants mostly herbs, shrubs and rarely small trees
Stem: herbaceous rarely woody, aerial; erect, cylindrical, branched, solid

or hollow, hairy or glabrous, underground stem in potato (Solanum
tuberosum)
Leaves: alternate, simple, rarely pinnately compound, exstipulate;
venation reticulate
Floral Characters
Inflorescence : Solitary, axillary or cymose as in Solanum
Flower: bisexual, actinomorphic
Calyx: sepals five, united, persistent, valvate aestivation
Corolla: petals five, united; valvate aestivation
Androecium: stamens five, epipetalous
Gynoecium: bicarpellary obligately placed, syncarpous; ovary superior,
bilocular, placenta swollen with many ovules, axile
Fruits: berry or capsule
Seeds: many, endospermous
Floral Formula: ⊕
Economic Importance
Many plants belonging to this family are source of food (tomato, brinjal,
potato), spice (chilli); medicine (belladonna, ashwagandha); fumigatory
(tobacco); ornamentals (petunia).
5.9.3 Liliaceae
Commonly called the ‘Lily family’ is a characteristic representative of
monocotyledonous plants. It is distributed world wide (Figure 5.23).
Vegetative characters: Perennial herbs with underground bulbs/corms/
rhizomes
Leaves mostly basal, alternate, linear, exstipulate with parallel venation
Floral characters
Inflorescence: solitary / cymose; often umbellate clusters
Flower: bisexual; actinomorphic
Perianth tepal six (3+3), often united into tube; valvate aestivation
Androecium: stamen six, 3+3, epitepalous
Gynoecium: tricarpellary, syncarpous, ovary superior, trilocular with
many ovules; axile placentation
Fruit: capsule, rarely berry
Seed: endospermous
Floral Formula: Br ⊕ P(3+3) A3+3 G(3)
Economic Importance
Many plants belonging to this family are good ornamentals (tulip,
Gloriosa), source of medicine (Aloe), vegetables (Asparagus), and
colchicine (Colchicum autumnale).
