PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT


You have already studied the organisation of a flowering plant in Chapter
5. Have you ever thought about where and how the structures like roots,
stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds arise and that too in an orderly
sequence? You are, by now, aware of the terms seed, seedling, plantlet,
mature plant. You have also seen that trees continue to increase in height
or girth over a period of time. However, the leaves, flowers and fruits of the
same tree not only have limited dimensions but also appear and fall
periodically and some time repeatedly. Why does vegetative phase precede
flowering in a plant? All plant organs are made up of a variety of tissues; is
there any relationship between the structure of a cell, a tissue, an organ
and the function they perform? Can the structure and the function of these
be altered? All cells of a plant are descendents of the zygote. The question
is, then, why and how do they have different structural and functional
attributes? Development is the sum of two processes: growth and
differentiation. To begin with, it is essential and sufficient to know that the
development of a mature plant from a zygote (fertilised egg) follow a precise
and highly ordered succession of events. During this process a complex
body organisation is formed that produces roots, leaves, branches, flowers,
fruits, and seeds, and eventually they die (Figure 15.1). The first step in the
process of plant growth is seed germination. The seed germinates when
favourable conditions for growth exist in the environment. In absence of
such favourable conditions the seeds do not germinate and goes into a
period of suspended growth or rest. Once favourable conditions return,
the seeds resume metabolic activities and growth takes place.
In this chapter, you shall also study some of the factors which
govern and control these developmental processes. These factors are both
intrinsic (internal) and extrinsic (external) to the plant.15.1 GROWTH
Growth is regarded as one of the most fundamental and conspicuous
characteristics of a living being. What is growth? Growth can be defined
as an irreversible permanent increase in size of an organ or its parts or
even of an individual cell. Generally, growth is accompanied by metabolic
processes (both anabolic and catabolic), that occur at the expense of
energy. Therefore, for example, expansion of a leaf is growth. How would
you describe the swelling of piece of wood when placed in water?
15.1.1 Plant Growth Generally is Indeterminate
Plant growth is unique because plants retain the capacity for unlimited
growth throughout their life. This ability of the plants is due to the presence
of meristems at certain locations in their body. The cells of such meristems
have the capacity to divide and self-perpetuate. The product, however,
soon loses the capacity to divide and such cells make up the plant body.
This form of growth wherein new cells are always being added to the
plant body by the activity of the meristem is called the open form of growth.
What would happen if the meristem ceases to divide? Does this ever
happen?
In Chapter 6, you have studied about the root apical meristem and
the shoot apical meristem. You know that they are responsible for theprimary growth of the plants and principally
contribute to the elongation of the plants along
their axis. You also know that in dicotyledonous
plants and gymnosperms, the lateral meristems,
vascular cambium and cork-cambium appear
later in life. These are the meristems that cause
the increase in the girth of the organs in which
they are active. This is known as secondary
growth of the plant (see Figure 15.2).
15.1.2 Growth is Measurable
Growth, at a cellular level, is principally a
consequence of increase in the amount of
protoplasm. Since increase in protoplasm is
difficult to measure directly, one generally
measures some quantity which is more or less
proportional to it. Growth is, therefore,
measured by a variety of parameters some of
which are: increase in fresh weight, dry weight,
length, area, volume and cell number. You may
find it amazing to know that one single maize
root apical mersitem can give rise to more than
17,500 new cells per hour, whereas cells in a
watermelon may increase in size by upto
3,50,000 times. In the former, growth is
expressed as increase in cell number; the latter
expresses growth as increase in size of the cell.
While the growth of a pollen tube is measured
in terms of its length, an increase in surface area
denotes the growth in a dorsiventral leaf.
15.1.3 Phases of Growth
The period of growth is generally divided into
three phases, namely, meristematic, elongation
and maturation (Figure 15.3). Let us
understand this by looking at the root tips. The
constantly dividing cells, both at the root apex
and the shoot apex, represent the meristematic
phase of growth. The cells in this region are rich
in protoplasm, possess large conspicuous
nuclei. Their cell walls are primary in nature,
thin and cellulosic with abundant
plasmodesmatal connections. The cells
proximal (just next, away from the tip) to themeristematic zone represent the phase of elongation. Increased
vacuolation, cell enlargement and new cell wall deposition are the
characteristics of the cells in this phase. Further away from the apex, i.e.,
more proximal to the phase of elongation, lies the portion of axis which is
undergoing the phase of maturation. The cells of this zone, attain their
maximal size in terms of wall thickening and protoplasmic modifications.
Most of the tissues and cell types you have studied in Chapter 6 represent
this phase.
15.1.4 Growth Rates
The increased growth per unit time is termed as growth rate. Thus, rate
of growth can be expressed mathematically. An organism, or a part of the
organism can produce more cells in a variety of ways.
The growth rate shows an increase that may be
arithmetic or geometrical (Figure 15.4).
In arithmetic growth, following mitotic cell
division, only one daughter cell continues to divide
while the other differentiates and matures. The
simplest expression of arithmetic growth is
exemplified by a root elongating at a constant rate.
Look at Figure 15.5. On plotting the length of the
organ against time, a linear curve is obtained.
Mathematically, it is expressed as
Lt
 = L0
 + rt
Lt
 = length at time ‘t’
L0
 = length at time ‘zero’
r = growth rate / elongation per unit time.
Let us now see what happens in geometrical
growth. In most systems, the initial growth is slow
(lag phase), and it increases rapidly thereafter – at
an exponential rate (log or exponential phase). Here,
both the progeny cells following mitotic cell division
retain the ability to divide and continue to do so.
However, with limited nutrient supply, the growth
slows down leading to a stationary phase. If we plot
the parameter of growth against time, we get a typical
sigmoid or S-curve (Figure 15.6). A sigmoid curve
is a characteristic of living organism growing in a
natural environment. It is typical for all cells, tissues
and organs of a plant. Can you think of more similar
examples? What kind of a curve can you expect in
a tree showing seasonal activities?
The exponential growth can be expressed as
W1
 = W0
 ert
W1
 = final size (weight, height, number etc.)
W0
 = initial size at the beginning of the period
r = growth rate
t = time of growth
e = base of natural logarithms
Here, r is the relative growth rate and is also the
measure of the ability of the plant to produce new
plant material, referred to as efficiency index. Hence,
the final size of W1
 depends on the initial size, W0
.
Quantitative comparisons between the growth of living system can
also be made in two ways : (i) measurement and the comparison of total
growth per unit time is called the absolute growth rate. (ii) The growth of
the given system per unit time expressed on a common basis, e.g., per
unit initial parameter is called the relative growth rate. In Figure 15.7
two leaves, A and B, are drawn that are of different sizes but shows
absolute increase in area in the given time to give leaves, A1 and B1
. However,
one of them shows much higher relative growth rate. Which one and why?
15.1.5 Conditions for Growth
Why do you not try to write down what you think are necessary conditions
for growth? This list may have water, oxygen and nutrients as very essential
elements for growth. The plant cells grow in size by cell enlargement which
in turn requires water. Turgidity of cells helps in extension growth. Thus,
plant growth and further development is intimately linked to the water
status of the plant. Water also provides the medium for enzymatic activities
needed for growth. Oxygen helps in releasing metabolic energy essential
for growth activities. Nutrients (macro and micro essential elements) are
required by plants for the synthesis of protoplasm and act as source of
energy.
In addition, every plant organism has an optimum temperature range
best suited for its growth. Any deviation from this range could be
detrimental to its survival. Environmental signals such as light and gravity
also affect certain phases/stages of growth.15.2 DIFFERENTIATION, DEDIFFERENTIATION AND
REDIFFERENTIATION
The cells derived from root apical and shoot-apical meristems and
cambium differentiate and mature to perform specific functions. This act
leading to maturation is termed as differentiation. During differentiation,
cells undergo few to major structural changes both in their cell walls and
protoplasm. For example, to form a tracheary element, the cells would
lose their protoplasm. They also develop a very strong, elastic,
lignocellulosic secondary cell walls, to carry water to long distances even
under extreme tension. Try to correlate the various anatomical features
you encounter in plants to the functions they perform.
Plants show another interesting phenomenon. The living differentiated
cells, that by now have lost the capacity to divide can regain the capacity
of division under certain conditions. This phenomenon is termed as
dedifferentiation. For example, formation of meristems – interfascicular
cambium and cork cambium from fully differentiated parenchyma cells.
While doing so, such meristems/tissues are able to divide and produce
cells that once again lose the capacity to divide but mature to perform
specific functions, i.e., get redifferentiated. List some of the tissues in a
woody dicotyledenous plant that are the products of redifferentiation.
How would you describe a tumour? What would you call the parenchyma
cells that are made to divide under controlled laboratory conditions during
plant tissue culture?
Recall, in Section 15.1.1, we have mentioned that the growth in plants
is open, i.e., it can be indeterminate or determinate. Now, we may say that
even differentiation in plants is open, because cells/tissues arising out of
the same meristem have different structures at maturity. The final
structure at maturity of a cell/tissue is also determined by the location of
the cell within. For example, cells positioned away from root apical
meristems differentiate as root-cap cells, while those pushed to the
periphery mature as epidermis. Can you add a few more examples of
open differentiation correlating the position of a cell to its position in an
organ?
15.3 DEVELOPMENT
Development is a term that includes all changes that an organism goes
through during its life cycle from germination of the seed to senescence.
Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of processes which
constitute the development of a cell of a higher plant is given in Figure
15.8. It is also applicable to tissues/organs.Plants follow different pathways in response to environment or phases
of life to form different kinds of structures. This ability is called plasticity,
e.g., heterophylly in cotton, coriander and larkspur. In such plants, the
leaves of the juvenile plant are different in shape from those in mature
plants. On the other hand, difference in shapes of leaves produced in air
and those produced in water in buttercup also represent the
heterophyllous development due to environment (Figure 15.9). This
phenomenon of heterophylly is an example of plasticity.Thus, growth, differentiation and development are very closely related
events in the life of a plant. Broadly, development is considered as the
sum of growth and differentiation. Development in plants (i.e., both growth
and differentiation) is under the control of intrinsic and extrinsic factors.
The former includes both intracellular (genetic) or intercellular factors
(chemicals such as plant growth regulators) while the latter includes light,
temperature, water, oxygen, nutrition, etc.
15.4 PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS
15.4.1 Characteristics
The plant growth regulators (PGRs) are small, simple molecules of diverse
chemical composition. They could be indole compounds (indole-3-acetic
acid, IAA); adenine derivatives (N6
-furfurylamino purine, kinetin),
derivatives of carotenoids (abscisic acid, ABA); terpenes (gibberellic acid,
GA3
) or gases (ethylene, C2H4
). Plant growth regulators are variously
described as plant growth substances, plant hormones or phytohormones
in literature.
The PGRs can be broadly divided into two groups based on their
functions in a living plant body. One group of PGRs are involved in growth
promoting activities, such as cell division, cell enlargement, pattern
formation, tropic growth, flowering, fruiting and seed formation. These
are also called plant growth promoters, e.g., auxins, gibberellins and
cytokinins. The PGRs of the other group play an important role in plant
responses to wounds and stresses of biotic and abiotic origin. They are
also involved in various growth inhibiting activities such as dormancy
and abscission. The PGR abscisic acid belongs to this group. The gaseous
PGR, ethylene, could fit either of the groups, but it is largely an inhibitor
of growth activities.
15.4.2 The Discovery of Plant Growth Regulators
Interestingly, the discovery of each of the five
major groups of PGRs have been accidental.
All this started with the observation of Charles
Darwin and his son Francis Darwin when they
observed that the coleoptiles of canary grass
responded to unilateral illumination by
growing towards the light source
(phototropism). After a series of experiments,
it was concluded that the tip of coleoptile was
the site of transmittable influence that caused
the bending of the entire coleoptile (Figure
15.10). Auxin was isolated by F.W. Went from
tips of coleoptiles of oat seedlings.The ‘bakanae’ (foolish seedling) disease of rice seedlings, was caused
by a fungal pathogen Gibberella fujikuroi. E. Kurosawa (1926) reported
the appearance of symptoms of the disease in rice seedlings when they
were treated with sterile filtrates of the fungus. The active substances
were later identified as gibberellic acid.
F. Skoog and his co-workers observed that from the internodal
segments of tobacco stems the callus (a mass of undifferentiated cells)
proliferated only if, in addition to auxins the nutrients medium was
supplemented with one of the following: extracts of vascular tissues, yeast
extract, coconut milk or DNA. Miller et al. (1955), later identified and
crystallised the cytokinesis promoting active substance that they
termed kinetin.
During mid-1960s, three independent researches reported the
purification and chemical characterisation of three different kinds of
inhibitors: inhibitor-B, abscission II and dormin. Later all the three were
proved to be chemically identical. It was named abscisic acid (ABA).
H.H. Cousins (1910) confirmed the release of a volatile substance from
ripened oranges that hastened the ripening of stored unripened bananas.
Later this volatile substance was identified as ethylene, a gaseous PGR.
Let us study some of the physiological effects of these five categories
of PGRs in the next section.
15.4.3 Physiological Effects of Plant Growth Regulators
15.4.3.1 Auxins
Auxins (from Greek ‘auxein’ : to grow) was first isolated from human urine.
The term ‘auxin’ is applied to the indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and to other
natural and synthetic compounds having certain growth regulating
properties. They are generally produced by the growing apices of the stems
and roots, from where they migrate to the regions of their action. Auxins
like IAA and indole butyric acid (IBA) have been isolated from plants.
NAA (naphthalene acetic acid) and 2, 4-D (2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic)
are synthetic auxins. All these auxins have been used extensively in
agricultural and horticultural practices.
They help to initiate rooting in stem cuttings, an application widely
used for plant propagation. Auxins promote flowering e.g. in pineapples.
They help to prevent fruit and leaf drop at early stages but promote the
abscission of older mature leaves and fruits.
In most higher plants, the growing apical bud inhibits the growth of
the lateral (axillary) buds, a phenomenon called apical dominance.
Removal of shoot tips (decapitation) usually results in the growth of lateral
buds (Figure 15.11). It is widely applied in tea plantations, hedge-making.
Can you explain why?Auxins also induce parthenocarpy, e.g., in
tomatoes. They are widely used as herbicides.
2, 4-D, widely used to kill dicotyledonous
weeds, does not affect mature
monocotyledonous plants. It is used to prepare
weed-free lawns by gardeners. Auxin also
controls xylem differentiation and helps in cell
division.
15.4.3.2 Gibberellins
Gibberellins are another kind of promotory
PGR. There are more than 100 gibberellins
reported from widely different organisms such
as fungi and higher plants. They are denoted
as GA1
, GA2
, GA3
 and so on. However,
Gibberellic acid (GA3
) was one of the first
gibberellins to be discovered and remains the
most intensively studied form. All GAs are
acidic. They produce a wide range of
physiological responses in the plants. Their ability to cause an increase
in length of axis is used to increase the length of grapes stalks. Gibberellins,
cause fruits like apple to elongate and improve its shape. They also delay
senescence. Thus, the fruits can be left on the tree longer so as to extend
the market period. GA3
 is used to speed up the malting process in brewing
industry.
Sugarcane stores carbohydrate as sugar in their stems. Spraying
sugarcane crop with gibberellins increases the length of the stem, thus
increasing the yield by as much as 20 tonnes per acre.
Spraying juvenile conifers with GAs hastens the maturity period, thus
leading to early seed production. Gibberellins also promotes bolting
(internode elongation just prior to flowering) in beet, cabbages and many
plants with rosette habit.
15.4.3.3 Cytokinins
Cytokinins have specific effects on cytokinesis, and were discovered as
kinetin (a modified form of adenine, a purine) from the autoclaved herring
sperm DNA. Kinetin does not occur naturally in plants. Search for natural
substances with cytokinin-like activities led to the isolation of zeatin from
corn-kernels and coconut milk. Since the discovery of zeatin, several
naturally occurring cytokinins, and some synthetic compounds with cell
division promoting activity, have been identified. Natural cytokinins are
synthesised in regions where rapid cell division occurs, for example, root
apices, developing shoot buds, young fruits etc. It helps to produce newleaves, chloroplasts in leaves, lateral shoot growth and adventitious shoot
formation. Cytokinins help overcome the apical dominance. They promote
nutrient mobilisation which helps in the delay of leaf senescence.
15.4.3.4 Ethylene
Ethylene is a simple gaseous PGR. It is synthesised in large amounts
by tissues undergoing senescence and ripening fruits. Influences of
ethylene on plants include horizontal growth of seedlings, swelling of
the axis and apical hook formation in dicot seedlings. Ethylene promotes
senescence and abscission of plant organs especially of leaves and
flowers. Ethylene is highly effective in fruit ripening. It enhances the
respiration rate during ripening of the fruits. This rise in rate of
respiration is called respiratory climactic.
Ethylene breaks seed and bud dormancy, initiates germination in
peanut seeds, sprouting of potato tubers. Ethylene promotes rapid
internode/petiole elongation in deep water rice plants. It helps leaves/
upper parts of the shoot to remain above water. Ethylene also promotes
root growth and root hair formation, thus helping the plants to increase
their absorption surface.
Ethylene is used to initiate flowering and for synchronising fruit-set
in pineapples. It also induces flowering in mango. Since ethylene regulates
so many physiological processes, it is one of the most widely used PGR in
agriculture. The most widely used compound as source of ethylene is
ethephon. Ethephon in an aqueous solution is readily absorbed and
transported within the plant and releases ethylene slowly. Ethephon
hastens fruit ripening in tomatoes and apples and accelerates abscission
in flowers and fruits (thinning of cotton, cherry, walnut). It promotes female
flowers in cucumbers thereby increasing the yield.
15.4.3.5 Abscisic acid
As mentioned earlier, abscisic acid (ABA) was discovered for its role in
regulating abscission and dormancy. But like other PGRs, it also has
other wide ranging effects on plant growth and development. It acts as a
general plant growth inhibitor and an inhibitor of plant metabolism.
ABA inhibits seed germination. ABA stimulates the closure of stomata
and increases the tolerance of plants to various kinds of stresses.
Therefore, it is also called the stress hormone. ABA plays an important
role in seed development, maturation and dormancy. By inducing
dormancy, ABA helps seeds to withstand desiccation and other factors
unfavourable for growth. In most situations, ABA acts as an antagonist
to GAs.
We may summarise that for any and every phase of growth,
differentiation and development of plants, one or the other PGR has some
role to play. Such roles could be complimentary or antagonistic. These
could be individualistic or synergistic.Similarly, there are a number of events in the life of a plant where
more than one PGR interact to affect that event, e.g., dormancy in seeds/
buds, abscission, senescence, apical dominance, etc.
Remember, the role of PGR is of only one kind of intrinsic control.
Along with genomic control and extrinsic factors, they play an important
role in plant growth and development. Many of the extrinsic factors such
as temperature and light, control plant growth and development via PGR.
Some of such events could be: vernalisation, flowering, dormancy, seed
germination, plant movements, etc.
We shall discuss briefly the role of light and temperature (both of them,
the extrinsic factors) on initiation of flowering.
15.5 PHOTOPERIODISM
It has been observed that some plants require a periodic exposure to
light to induce flowering. It is also seen that such plants are able to
measure the duration of exposure to light. For example, some plants
require the exposure to light for a period exceeding a well defined critical
duration, while others must be exposed to light for a period less than this
critical duration before the flowering is initiated in them. The former group
of plants are called long day plants while the latter ones are termed
short day plants. The critical duration is different for different plants.
There are many plants, however, where there is no such correlation
between exposure to light duration and induction of flowering response;
such plants are called day-neutral plants (Figure 15.12). It is now alsoknown that not only the duration of light period but that the duration of
dark period is also of equal importance. Hence, it can be said that flowering
in certain plants depends not only on a combination of light and dark
exposures but also their relative durations. This response of plants to
periods of day/night is termed photoperiodism. It is also interesting to
note that while shoot apices modify themselves into flowering apices prior
to flowering, they (i.e., shoot apices of plants) by themselves cannot percieve
photoperiods. The site of perception of light/dark duration are the leaves.
It has been hypothesised that there is a hormonal substance(s) that is
responsible for flowering. This hormonal substance migrates from leaves
to shoot apices for inducing flowering only when the plants are exposed
to the necessary inductive photoperiod.
15.6 VERNALISATION
There are plants for which flowering is either quantitatively or qualitatively
dependent on exposure to low temperature. This phenomenon is termed
vernalisation. It prevents precocious reproductive development late in
the growing season, and enables the plant to have sufficient time to reach
maturity. Vernalisation refers specially to the promotion of flowering by a
period of low temperature. Some important food plants, wheat, barley,
rye have two kinds of varieties: winter and spring varieties. The ‘spring’
variety are normally planted in the spring and come to flower and produce
grain before the end of the growing season. Winter varieties, however, if
planted in spring would normally fail to flower or produce mature grain
within a span of a flowering season. Hence, they are planted in autumn.
They germinate, and over winter come out as small seedlings, resume
growth in the spring, and are harvested usually around mid-summer.
Another example of vernalisation is seen in biennial plants. Biennials
are monocarpic plants that normally flower and die in the second season.
Sugarbeet, cabbages, carrots are some of the common biennials.
Subjecting the growing of a biennial plant to a cold treatment stimulates
a subsequent photoperiodic flowering response.
15.7 SEED DORMANCY
There are certain seeds which fail to germinate even when external
conditions are favourable. Such seeds are understood to be undergoing
a period of dormancy which is controlled not by external environment
but are under endogenous control or conditions within the seed itself.
Impermeable and hard seed coat; presence of chemical inhibitors such
as abscissic acids, phenolic acids, para-ascorbic acid; and immatureembryos are some of the reasons which causes seed dormancy. This dormancy
however can be overcome through natural means and various other man-made
measures. For example, the seed coat barrier in some seeds can be broken by
mechanical abrasions using knives, sandpaper, etc. or vigorous shaking. In nature,
these abrasions are caused by microbial action, and passage through digestive
tract of animals. Effect of inhibitory substances can be removed by subjecting the
seeds to chilling conditions or by application of certain chemicals like gibberellic
acid and nitrates. Changing the environmental conditions, such as light and
temperature are other methods to overcome seed dormancy.
